dev_doc: add evolution of index management (#16685)
elastic/apm-server: dev_docs/index_management_evolution.md

## Index Management Evolution

Over multiple releases, APM Server has undergone several changes in how it manages indices. These changes have been implemented incrementally, making it challenging for users to track the evolution and understand the current state of index management. Index management is an aggregated term used for the following components:

1. Index Templates
2. Component Templates
3. Ingest Pipelines
4. ILM Policies
5. Data Streams

The primary goal of this document is to create detailed timeline that captures:

- Sequence of changes made to index management across different releases.

> - Retionale behind these changes.

Reviewer: I think this was not applied (same for some of the below diffs)

    - With Version 8.0, index management shifted to Fleet, removing them from APM Server.
    - By Version 8.15, APM Server began relying on the ES `apm-data` plugin, further decoupling index management from the server itself.
    - Leveraging the `apm-data` plugin:
        - Simplifies setup for user of APM Server binary.
        - The `apm` package is only required when configuring Elastic APM under Fleet.
        - Removes the possibility of index templates being missing on startup.
2. [elastic/integrations](https://github.com/elastic/integrations)
    - Previously, the APM Integrations package was responsible for index management in Fleet for APM Server.
    - Transitioning to the `apm-data` plugin made the index templates in the apm package obsolete as it meant moving the index template setup to the Elasticsearch `apm-data` plugin.
3. [elastic/elasticsearch](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch)
    - The introduction of the `apm-data` plugin in ES "moved" index management one abstraction layer closer to the actual data layer.
    - Resulting in a more streamlined setup and reducing the dependency on external integrations for a standalone APM Server.

## Timeline

> - **Jul 11, 2023 (v8.12.0)**

Reviewer: Any benefits of using an explicit date? I would prefer just using versions tbh

    - The APM plugin was introduced in ES v8.12.0 ([#97546](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/97546)) but disabled by default.
- **May 21, 2024 (v8.15.0)**
    - The APM plugin in ES was only enabled as the default in v8.15.0 ([#108860](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108860)).
- **May 22, 2024 (v8.15.0)**
    - For APM Server, the requirement to install the APM Integrations package was removed in v8.15.0 ([#12066](https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/pull/12066)).
- **May 22, 2024 (v8.15.0)**
    - PR [#108885](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108885) ensures that templates installed via `apm-data` ES plugin should take precedence over the ones installed by the APM Integrations package.
- **May 26, 2024 (v8.15.0)**
    - In [#9949](https://github.com/elastic/integrations/pull/9949) all datastreams was removed from APM Integrations.

> ### 8.x - (Fixes & Improvements)

Reviewer 2: I find the timelines below confusing as it is right now. 
@lahsivjar given that you worked on several of the PRs, could you help add some clarification and give this a sanity check?

The switch to the ES apm plugin caused several issues for our customers, see [Elastic APM Known Issues](https://www.elastic.co/docs/release-notes/apm/known-issues).

> - **Sep 16, 2024 (v8.16.0)**

Reviewer 2: The below fixes do not all belong to `8.16.0`, and you list a version for every point, so I'd remove this header.

Author: Related to my comment above: https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/pull/16685#discussion_r2071630413

>     - Any old datastreams created before the switch would be `Unmanaged` because the datastream will never be updated with the DSL lifecycle.

Author: The official fix is in bullet 3 in the section. The first two bullets is to give some context. I can see how this is confusing. I'll restructure things. 

- The tricky part here is; the fix in 8.15.1 got reverted, see [Issue](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/112137), the final fix was in the PR that was approved in 16 Sep 2024, see [PR](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/112759) and only added in 8.16.0. 
- I used to PR merged dates as the timeline instead of versioning, since backports makes the timeline even more confusing.

>     - Any old datastreams created before the switch would be `Unmanaged` because the datastream will never be updated with the DSL lifecycle.

Reviewer: >The tricky part here is; the fix in 8.15.1 got reverted, see https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/112137 and https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/issues/13898#issuecomment-2306911730, the final fix was in the PR that was merged on 16 Sep 2024 and only added in 8.16.0, see https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/112759

The purpose of the revert was to fix the serverless deployment and was done on main. I am confused what this point actually means as the next release from main would be `8.16.0` which would have the fix for ILM while respecting serverless restrictions.

>     - New indices created for clusters which migrate to 8.15.0 don't have any lifecycle attached as existing datastream needs to be updated explicitly, see [Docs](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/tutorial-manage-existing-data-stream.html).

Author: I think I'll remove the "fixes & improvements section" heading, and restructure my language. The idea here was to list the PRs that fixed issues related to the index management changes introduced in 8.15.

    - PR [#112759](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/112759) fixes the fallback to legacy ILM policies when a datastream is updated.

> - **Nov 1, 2024 (v8.15.4, v8.16.0, v8.17.0)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Nov 1, 2024 (v8.15.4, v8.16.0)**
```

No need to list `8.17.0` when already fixed in the previous minor.

    - Lazy rollover on a data stream is not triggered when writing a document that is rerouted to another data stream, fixed in ES [#116031](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/116031).
- **Nov 5, 2024 (v8.15.4, v8.16.0, v8.17.0)**
    - PR [#116219](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/116219) will trigger a lazy rollover of existing data streams regardless of whether the index template is being created or updated.
    - This ensures that the apm-data plugin will roll over data streams that were previously using the Fleet integration package.
- **Nov 13, 2024 (v8.17.0)** 

>     - With the new index templates, if you were not using any custom ILM Policy, APM data will obey to the new Data stream Lifecycle instead of ILM.

Reviewer 2: In `8.17.0` DSL was removed, it's always ILM going forward. What made you think it is still DSL for the default case?

Reviewer: +1, since 8.17.0 DSL was removed. This has been captured in the https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/8.17/apm-release-notes-8.17.html#_added_6

>     - The default ILM Policies of APM are removed if not in use. If you defined a custom ILM policy via a `@custom` component template, the ILM policy will be preserved and preferred to DSL.

Reviewer 2: Default ILM policies are not removed.

Reviewer: +1, default ILM policies are ADDED back in 8.17.0

>     - In [#115687](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/115687), we moved to adding default ILM policies and switch to ILM for apm-data plugin, instead of just having a fallback as outlined in [#112759](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/112759).

Reviewer 2: The apm-data plugin is used for apm-server and for serverless; maybe this caused some confusion on some of the PRs.

## Index Management Evolution

Over multiple releases, APM Server has undergone several changes in how it manages indices. These changes have been implemented incrementally, making it challenging for users to track the evolution and understand the current state of index management. Index management is an aggregated term used for the following components:

1. Index Templates
2. Component Templates
3. Ingest Pipelines
4. ILM Policies
5. Data Streams

The primary goal of this document is to create detailed timeline that captures:

- Sequence of changes made to index management across different releases.
- Retionale behind these changes.

> - Impact on users and their configurations, ie bugs that was introduced and fixed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Impact on users and their configurations, i.e. bugs that was introduced and fixed.
```

## Summary

1. [elastic/apm-server](https://github.com/elastic/apm-server)
    - Initially, APM Server managed its own index templates and ILM policies.
    - With Version 8.0, index management shifted to Fleet, removing them from APM Server.
    - By Version 8.15, APM Server began relying on the ES `apm-data` plugin, further decoupling index management from the server itself.
    - Leveraging the `apm-data` plugin:
        - Simplifies setup for user of APM Server binary.

>         - Replaces the need for installing any Fleet integration package for Elastic APM.

Reviewer 2: The `apm` package still exists, but is not a requirement anymore for indexing data, so I would rephrase a bit to 
> - Replaces the need for installing the Fleet integration package for Elastic APM **before data ingestion**.

        - Removes the possibility of index templates being missing on startup.

> 2. [elastic/integrations](https://github.com/elastic/integrations)

Reviewer 3: As mentioned by Silvia, apm package still serves a purpose for configuring apm under fleet. Can you document this?

    - Previously, the APM Integrations package was responsible for index management in Fleet for APM Server.

>     - Transitioning to the `apm-data` plugin required removing templates created by the integration to prevent conflict, as these templates has higher priority and cloud override those from the plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Transitioning to the `apm-data` plugin made the index templates in the apm package obsolete as it meant moving the index template setup to the Elasticsearch `apm-data` plugin.  
```

3. [elastic/elasticsearch](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch)
    - The introduction of the `apm-data` plugin in ES "moved" index management one abstraction layer closer to the actual data layer.
    - Resulting in a more streamlined setup and reducing the dependency on external integrations for a standalone APM Server.

## 8.15.0 - (Release: Aug 2, 2024)

- **Jul 11, 2023**

>     - The APM plugin was introduced in ES v8.12.0 ([#97546](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/97546))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The APM plugin was introduced in ES v8.12.0 ([#97546](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/97546)) but disabled by default.
```

- **May 21, 2024**
    - The APM plugin in ES was only enabled as the default in v8.15.0 ([#108860](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108860)).
- **May 22, 2024**
    - For APM Server, the requirement to install the APM Integrations package was removed in v8.15.0 ([#12066](https://github.com/elastic/apm-server/pull/12066)).
- **May 22, 2024**
    - PR [#108885](https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108885) ensures that templates installed via `apm-data` ES plugin should take precedence over the ones installed by the APM Integrations package.
- **May 26, 2024**

>     - In [#9949](https://github.com/elastic/integrations/pull/9949) all datastreams was removed from APM Integrations.

Reviewer 2: I would not list the dates but only the versions here.

> ## 8.x - (Fixes & Improvements)

Reviewer 2: - Again, I'd focus on versions not dates for PRs or releases, as versions are more informative when troubleshooting. 

- The issues listed here should already be covered by public docs in the _Known Issues_ sections. Can you provide links for clarity?

Author: This was my initial approach, since versions encodes the dates by definition. The issue is the backports mess up the timelines to understand the development evolution. So my approach was to use the PR Merge dates. I have now added the versions in brackets which makes more sense; we capture the dev timelines plus the releases and backports.

Reviewer 2: IMO it makes sense to list the PRs so one can tie things together. But the real impact of a PR is still scoped to versions and not to the merge dates. Especially with backport PRs, isn't it much easier to follow along when the changes are listed for the versions they were introduced for rather than the merge date (the date doesn't indicate to which version a change was backported).
